# Data transformation of ucec_cptac_2020

## The data
Article:
Yongchao Dou et al. 2020 Cell.

https://www.cell.com/cell/fulltext/S0092-8674(20)30107-0

Clinical data were retrieved from Supplementary Tables S1 and S2, 
as well as [LinkedOmics](http://www.linkedomics.org/data_download/CPTAC-UCEC/).


### Metadata

- Clinical data was inferred from the supplementary table S1, sheet `UCEC_CPTAC3_meta_table_V2.1`.
  Manual distinction was made on patient and sample attributes.
- Data contained 1 tumor sample per patient.

### Mutation data

- Data from LinkedOmics, file `UCEC_somatic_mutation_site_level_V2.1`: Site level somatic mutation in maf format, HG38.

- The original coordinates (in GRCh38) were transformed to GRCh37 (hg19)
  using [Lift Genome](https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgLiftOver). This affected the columns NCBI_Build, Start_Position and End_Position. The rows for which there was no match for
  hg19 coordinates were removed (410 out of 53101).
- The name of the samples was edited to match with metadata: removed `*_T`, and substituted the PATIENT_ID with the respective SAMPLE_ID.

### CNA data

- Data from table S2, sheet `F-gene-CNV`: Gene level copy number data generated by WGS data, ratio.
- The values for continuous CNA data were directly read from the file.
- The Entrez Gene ID was obtained from the respective Hugo symbols using Biomart.
- The discrete CNA data were derived from the continuous files, with thresholds as follows: (-inf, -1): -2, \[-1, -0.1): -1, \[-0.1, 0.1\]: 0, (0.1, 1\]: 1, (1, inf): 2.

### Expression data
_mRNA_

- Data from table S2, sheet `D-gene-expression`: Linear gene expression RSEM, upper quantile normalized and log2(+1) transformed.
- The expression values were directly read from this data.
- The Entrez Gene IDs were derived from the Hugo symbols using Biomart.
- The z-scores were calculated using all diploid samples as the reference population. For the computation, the zeroes were excluded and the values were log-transformed.

_miRNA_

- Data from table S2, sheet `G-miRNA-expression`: miRNA expression RPM,  log2(+1) transformed.
- The z-scores were calculated using all diploid samples as the reference population. For the computation, the zeroes were excluded and the values were log-transformed.

_cRNA_

- Data from table S2, sheet `E-circRNA-expression`: Circular RNA expression RSEM, upper quantile normalized and log2(+1) transformed.
- Transformed as generic assay. Other added columns were ENTITY_STABLE_ID, NAME and GENE_SYMBOL (all derived from the index name).

### Methylation data

- Data from table S2, sheet `H-gene-methylation`: Gene level methylation data, median of probe beta values of each gene is used as gene beta value.
- Transformed as generic assay. Other added columns were ENTITY_STABLE_ID, NAME and GENE_SYMBOL (all derived from the Hugo Symbol).

### Protein data

- Data from table S2, sheet `Table A-global-proteomics`: Global proteomics data, median polishing and log2 transformed, no missing value filtering.
- The z-scores were calculated using all diploid samples as the reference population.

### Phosphoproteomics data

- Data from table S2, sheet `B-phospho-proteomics`: Phosphoproteomics site level data, median polishing and log2 transformed, no missing value filtering.

- Transformed as generic assay. Other added columns were ENTITY_STABLE_ID,
  NAME and GENE_SYMBOL (all derived from the index name).

### Acetylproteomics data

- Data from table S2, sheet `C-acetyl-proteomics`: Acetylproteomics site level data, median polishing and log2 transformed, no missing value filtering.
- Transformed as generic assay. Other added columns were ENTITY_STABLE_ID,
  NAME and GENE_SYMBOL (all derived from the index name).









